From the New York Times, I'm [music]
Natalie Kitroeff. This is The Daily.
>> [music]
>> As the US and Iran try to reach a
lasting end to the war, a major threat
has emerged, [music] the volatile
conflict in Lebanon.
President Trump needs Israel to [music]
stop attacking Hezbollah there in order
to get Iran to agree to a deal.
But many supporters [music] of Israeli
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu feel
betrayed by Trump's [music] actions.
Today, my colleagues Ronen Bergman
[music] and Mark Mazzetti explain the
growing tensions between the United
States and Israel and how this moment is
testing [music] a decades-old alliance.
It's Wednesday, June 24th.
Ronen, Mark, welcome back. It's great to
have you both here again.
>> Thanks, Natalie.
>> Pleasure being here. Thank you.
>> So, in the last several days, we have
seen a stunning break between the US and
Israel who entered this war in Iran as
partners and are now very clearly at
odds over how it ends. And this is a
split that you both said was already
developing in April, the last time you
were on the show.
And so I want to start by asking how big
of a deal is the rupture that we are
seeing over this new ceasefire and peace
negotiation?
>> I think, Natalie, there's no, at least
not in my vocabulary, not in English and
not even in Hebrew,
there are not enough words to describe
the magnitude of what we are seeing from
the point of view of Israeli politics,
of Netanyahu's legacy, his present
chances to be reelected, and of course
from the point of view of the Israeli
public.
Three times he was able to convince
Trump to allow him to strike in Iran,
then he convinced him to join him in
June,
and then he convinced Trump to fulfill
his life dream and join US Israeli
strike together in order to topple the
regime.
So, until then, everything went very
well for him. And this overnight shift
of the American administration
is the undo of everything for him.
>> Yeah, is it fair, Mark, to say that now
the strength of that alliance between
the US and Israel is in question now
that we see the terms of this MOU
between Iran and the United States?
>> Yeah, Natalie, it's not only fair to say
it, I think it's also even potentially
an understatement. These two countries
knew how to get into a war, but they had
no idea how to get out of it. They were
on or they are on two totally different
pages about the outcome of this war. And
once the war didn't go according to the
most wildly optimistic outcomes that
they hoped it would in the first few
days, things began going off the rails,
the relationship started to fracture,
and this is where we are today.
>> So, walk us through how we arrived at
this point.
>> So, let's go back to when the MOU was
signed last week and where things stand
right now. Iran's regime is still in
place.
Iran's ballistic missile force is
diminished, but still intact. Iran's
nuclear program,
which was ostensibly the biggest reason
for carrying out this war, is very much
diminished, but the future of it is sort
of for a later negotiation. They've sort
of punted that issue.
So, the main goals of the war haven't
been achieved.
Even President Trump said, "Sir, you
shouldn't let them have any missile."
When asked about Iran's missiles, Trump
said, "Well,
>> I said, "Well,
>> they're allowed to have them."
>> What am I going to do? Am I going to let
Saudi Arabia have missiles, but they
can't have them?
>> Yes, sir.
>> Can't doesn't work that way, you know?
>> Implying that if other countries like
Saudi Arabia, like Israel have them, why
not Iran?
>> And missiles aren't the problem.
Missiles are
they hurt a little location, but they
don't blow up the planet.
>> And of course, there is the sort of
central issue of Hezbollah and Lebanon,
and the fact that this new agreement
restrains Israel's movements, freedom to
hit Hezbollah is now restricted, and
this is, I think, as we talked about the
last time we were on the show, a
fundamental issue for Netanyahu
politically, because he's made this
pledge that he will protect Israel from
Hezbollah.
>> Right.
>> Israel wanted to
have these two issues, two fronts,
totally separated. To get the Hezbollah
issue and the Lebanon Lebanese issue out
of the agreement, that the agreement
will only deal with Iran, the US,
nuclear, etc.
Iran wanted to make the connection,
because they felt they are in debt
because Hezbollah intervened to help
them. Now they need to help Hezbollah.
Iran won.
>> So, Israel is in this kind of
extraordinary position where, because
Iran just had so much leverage in these
negotiations, and the US agreed to these
terms, Israel's ability to fight
Hezbollah is now restricted, even though
Israel was not at the negotiating table,
and they wouldn't have wanted this.
Trump signed the deal anyway.
>> That's right. And so, we ended up on
ground where Iran came out with the
better end of the deal.
>> So, what has the reaction been in
Israel?
>> So, usually the massive machine of
mouthpieces for
Prime Minister Netanyahu in the Israeli
media,
the radio stations, and mainly in
Channel 14, there's a TV station, I
think maybe it can be equivalent to
Newsmax on steroids.
Very, very supportive of Netanyahu.
>> Uh-huh.
>> Doesn't matter what Netanyahu does,
he can flip and turn, and he can say one
thing and the next day the other, they
will support him. And also, until last
week, they also supported Trump. Their
admiration, their compliments, their
flattery to the president was second
only to their attitude towards Prime
Minister Netanyahu. But the second it
came clear that Trump is going to sign
the agreement, they flipped, all of
them.
>> [music]
>> And they started a slander campaign.
They said that that Trump betrayed
Israel.
They turned on the Vice President
[music]
Vance.
They called him anti-Semite.
They said that he is the legitimizer
of terrorism, the legitimizer of
Hezbollah.
>> Wow.
>> [music]
>> And I think the worst was what they said
against Kushner and Witkoff.
And one of the main anchor person for
Channel 14 said, [music]
"They did that because they're Jewish."
>> What?
>> I know it sounds unbelievable, but in
the Israeli television,
they said that they are Jewish Jew boys.
You know, slander terms about [music]
Jews.
They said that
they received bribe from Qatar.
>> Mhm.
>> Once they identify the enemy,
Vice President Pence and the two
advisers,
they don't [music] care. They just
lashed on them.
>> Ronan, can you just decode that because
it sounds really difficult, honestly, to
parse? These are
Israelis who are lobbying anti-Semitic
attacks against Jared Kushner and Steve
Witkoff.
Like, what is happening there?
>> These people, they don't care about
anything except one thing, which is to
support Prime Minister Netanyahu.
Someone I know called them the Zoom
Bibi, meaning they do everything
Prime Minister want them to do and
support any of his policies. The other
thing is that they always look for a
scapegoat. Whatever goes wrong for
Netanyahu,
they look for someone to blame. Now,
they cannot blame the head of the
military or the head of Mossad, the head
of the Shin Bet, or the attorney
general. So, the only person they can
blame is is President Trump.
>> You're saying essentially that they'll
sink to any level in order to defend
Netanyahu, even if that means
perpetuating these anti-Semitic tropes.
>> They will do everything they believe can
assist Prime Minister Netanyahu
in schlepping the blame on someone else,
even if this includes anti-Semitic
phrasing, and ruining the relationship
with someone who might be the next
president of the US.
Now, the ministers, the Netanyahu tried
to keep on a short leash,
they were a little bit more disciplined
and they didn't went down to this level.
But they did say
Israel is going to defend itself whether
against Iran or against Lebanon.
They say and if the situation is so bad
and we are all alone, there's only one
person who can take care of the
situation and knows how to handle a
situation, of course Prime Minister
Netanyahu. Whatever the truce agreement
MOU says,
Israel will continue to do whatever it
believes it's necessary or Netanyahu
believes it's necessary, Israel will
continue.
And this what is basically led to an
ongoing more friction and more clashes
between the Israeli and American
administration.
>> These government figures are essentially
saying, "We will defy the truce when it
comes to fighting Hezbollah in Lebanon,
which is pretty amazing."
>> Yes.
>> As that happens, that elicits a reaction
from the Vice President, from J.D.
Vance.
>> If I was in the cabinet of the Israeli
government, I might not be attacking the
only powerful ally that I have anywhere
left in the entire world.
>> Talk to me about that.
>> [snorts]
>> Yeah, Vance comes out publicly and is
extraordinarily blunt. He said to
Israel, effectively, "We're your only
friend in the world."
>> Two-thirds of the defensive weapons that
have protected your homeland have been
built by American hands and paid for by
American tax dollars.
>> And you should be grateful because we're
keeping you afloat, we're defending you.
>> And anybody in Israel who thinks their
biggest problem is the President of the
United States needs to wake up and smell
the reality of the situation that
country is in.
>> Be careful in your criticisms because we
always have the ability to cut off the
things that
help defend Israel. So, it was this
veiled threat of cutting aid, cutting
military equipment, which of course
Israel does desperately need from the
United States, but it's sort of playing
this card which you have not seen a
senior American official certainly the
American vice president do perhaps ever.
>> You've seen people in their system, Ben
Gvir and Smotrich, who have attacked the
deal. And I guess my response to them
would be
what is your exact proposal?
>> And then Vance also talked to our
colleague Ross Douthat and said that
these two hard-right ministers in
Netanyahu's cabinet, Ben Gvir and
Smotrich, should not be attacking this
deal without offering any other way out
of the war.
>> You know, you're you're a country of of
9 million people. You can't just kill
your way out of solving every single
national security problem that you have.
>> Taken together, this was just quite a
remarkable set of direct criticisms of
Israel from the vice president.
>> Yes, and then late last week
>> We're starting off with some breaking
news this morning as you're taking a
live look right now at the
Israel-Lebanon border this morning.
>> Hezbollah attacks into Israel, which
elicits a Israeli military response on
Beirut.
>> Israeli strikes on southern Lebanon
killed at least seven people, including
two children, hours after reports
emerged of a ceasefire agreement.
>> Creating this flare-up that once again
really imperils this very fragile deal.
>> This is not the reality we can accept,
and this is exactly why the IDF
continues to operate in southern
Lebanon.
>> And in that way, Lebanon is sort of
looking like the center of the question
of whether this will hold or not.
>> Right. Iran said briefly that the strait
had been closed again. And again, it
seemed like maybe this whole deal was
off. This was really a moment where
everyone looked and said, "Oh, no.
Israel and Hezbollah are possibly going
to sink this entire peace negotiation."
>> That's right. And I think that's really
where the danger is right now.
>> [music]
>> Is that Hezbollah has moved from the
periphery to
>> [music]
>> the central front in the future of peace
between Israel, Iran, and the United
States. And to this question of control.
Just how [music] much Iran can keep
Hezbollah in check so it doesn't blow up
the deal, and how much the United States
[music]
can restrain Israel from attacking
Hezbollah, also which might potentially
blow up the deal.
>> We'll be right back.
Okay. So, the stability of a deal here
hinges on whether the fighting in
Lebanon stops, which in turn hinges on
how much control Iran and the US have
over their allies.
>> That's right.
>> Correct.
>> So, Ronan, let's start with Hezbollah.
How much control does Iran have? Because
as we saw, Hezbollah continued to send
drones over the border to Israel after
this deal was signed. That attack
provoked a response.
>> Iran has the full control
over what Hezbollah is doing. I suspect
the drones were sent as part of the
Iranian tactics to improve their
position in the negotiation because from
their point of view it's a win-win.
If Netanyahu reacts or ordered the IDF
to react, then he gets himself into
another confrontation with Trump. If he
doesn't, then he gets into confrontation
with his own constituency at home, his
base, because they say, "You're not
reacting to what Hezbollah is doing."
>> What you're saying is that what we saw
in terms of the attacks was Iran
potentially intentionally baiting Israel
here? Because if they didn't want
Hezbollah to attack, they wouldn't have.
>> Yes, and more, Iran, I think, believes
it can control the level of the fire
without jeopardizing the deal, but
leading to further friction between
Prime Minister Netanyahu and President
Trump, and at the end to an anger of the
president that would lead to forcing
Israel not just to a ceasefire, but to a
total withdrawal from Lebanon.
>> In a sense, trying to set up a pitch
battle between Trump and Netanyahu,
stirring the pot. Does that feel right
to you, Mark?
>> Yes, although I think there's a
dangerous game here that Iran might be
playing, and they recognize that, right?
They do not want a return to a
full-scale war. They have locked in an
agreement right now that is very
favorable for them, right? Effectively,
all they had to do was open the Strait
of Hormuz, and now they've got a lot of
money coming to them in what were frozen
assets, right? So, a return to a
full-scale war imperils that deal, but
also brings a lot more violence to the
country of Iran.
So, to Rona's point, I think there's
this question of if they can keep the
sort of temperature at the right level
where it can continue to imperil the
relationship between Netanyahu and Trump
without going back to a full-scale war,
and that's the sort of danger here. But
thus far, they've been playing it quite
well.
>> And it seems like the bet Iran is making
right now is that Israel will react
really forcefully to any attack from
Hezbollah by, for example, attacking
Beirut.
And that kind of response has gotten
President Trump's attention recently.
>> I think they could do better.
>> In a bad way.
>> With respect to Hezbollah.
>> Right?
>> That's right. When two drones are shot
into the desert and dropped harmlessly,
you don't have to knock down buildings
in Beirut.
They could behave better.
>> So, Netanyahu has framed these attacks
as defensive, right? We are responding
to Hezbollah's attacks on Israel, and
we've a right to defend ourselves, so
we're going to hit into Beirut. That is
also a card that Netanyahu will continue
to play to see how far he can push Trump
and test Trump's patience, right?
Knowing, as we said earlier, Netanyahu
has this sort of political situation
where he has to deal with the security
of northern Israel for his own political
future, but also he can't entirely blow
up his relationship with President
Trump, so he's going to see how far he
can push it.
>> Okay, I want to turn to the question of
how much Trump can do to keep Netanyahu
in check, because obviously, whatever
the incentives and reasons that Israel
has for attacking Hezbollah in this way,
those kinds of strikes are precisely
what threatens a deal that Trump seems
to care very much about preserving.
>> Yeah, I think that since Trump became
president again,
Netanyahu showed high sensitivity
not to cross that line, not to force
Trump to outcast him publicly.
And when he felt that Trump is just
about to explode, he said, "Okay, I
obey."
But something is different now.
Netanyahu maybe has now a different
calculus. The calculus is the coming
elections.
And he believes that if he is just
obeying Trump, he will come up as
something very, very weak who cannot
stand up
to an American president and is trying
to say to his constituency, I am not
obeying President Trump when it comes to
national security.
And this road
might lead to further friction between
them.
>> So,
that in a sense tells us that Netanyahu
may be thinking he has more to lose in
obeying Trump than to gain from it.
>> Prime Minister Netanyahu, I think, is
deliberating between obeying Trump or
going against him
and supporting a much stronger war in
Lebanon. I don't think that he already
made a call, but his call will not just
impact the relationship between him and
Trump. It will also so impact the deal
between the US and Iran.
>> And Mark, how is Trump responding to
this test of just how much his ally in
Netanyahu will really follow his lead?
>> Well, so publicly, he is flexing. He's
basically pointing out how much he kind
of controls Netanyahu. He said, in fact,
a direct quote, that Netanyahu will do
whatever I want him to do, okay? I think
he's also willing to give Netanyahu who
some space to a point,
but anything that is going to blow up
this deal that Trump desperately wants,
that's the breaking point.
>> It sounds like for Trump, the core
tension is how much does he care about
preserving this special relationship
with Israel versus how much does he care
about preserving this deal with Iran,
and how far he's willing to go
to make sure that it doesn't fall apart.
>> I think President Trump has shown that
in his view alliances are dispensable if
they get in the way of something he
wants.
In this case, what he really wants is an
end to this war and a deal and moving on
before the November elections. He's
thinking about his own political
future.
>> Obviously, Mark, the big thing President
Trump could do is make aid conditional
on this ceasefire sticking. Beyond
rhetoric, that is the actual leverage
the US has.
Would Trump use that?
>> Well, I think it's still unlikely that
President Trump would take that drastic
step to make aid absolutely conditional.
And of course, he's not the only player
here, right? Congress has a role. But
that was certainly the threat that J.D.
Vance was raising when he told Israel,
you know, back off, we're your only
friend, and we're the only one keeping
you all safe.
>> Right.
>> But the fact that this is all being
discussed now, that there's these real
questions of, you know, might the United
States actually condition aid or pull
aid, like we are in uncharted territory
in the sense that just a few months ago,
we were talking about this close
US-Israel partnership on the Iran war.
>> But
if it's unlikely that the US actually
would pull aid or make it conditional on
the ceasefire sticking,
is it possible that Netanyahu may just
say, "Okay, I'm going to call President
Trump's bluff."
>> I don't think that Netanyahu would like
to go down this road. He has already
lost so much in the Israeli public
opinion that accelerating the clash with
the presidency
would only damage him more towards the
elections.
I think that the Israelis don't
understand how much damage Netanyahu's
moves in the last, you know, 6 months
and the way that it's seen that
Netanyahu has convinced the president to
go
to this adventure
where the president thought maybe this
is going to be just another Venezuela
and found himself and the US found
itself in the quicksands of the Persian
Gulf. And the damage of that will last
for
for a very long time.
>> And Natalie, let me just add that we
talked about Netanyahu always sort of
saying his great superpower was his
knowledge of American politics and his
ability to play American politics. And
so it's sort of a great irony here that
the legacy ultimately might be driving a
bipartisan consensus between Democrats
and Republicans against Israel and sort
of driving this relationship ultimately
into the ditch by the guy who said he
always knew more about American politics
than anyone else in Israel.
>> Right, and the other irony is that Iran
may end up being this key factor that
really drives a wedge between the US and
Israel. Theoretically, they're common
enemy.
>> Something that Netanyahu for decades has
been trying to get an American
president, any American president, to do
would be to attack Iran. And he gets
this moment and he gets this opportunity
and this is where it ends up.
>> And when you think about where this has
ended up, how bad is the damage to this
relationship? Can it be smoothed over if
the ceasefire ends up holding, if the
fighting dies down?
Or has there been more permanent harm
done here? Something that could lead to
a fundamental reshaping of this
decades-long alliance.
>> I think the future
of the relationship depend on what would
happen with Iran. And what would happen
with Hezbollah.
Because now Israel is sort of handcuffed
by the agreement.
And if the agreement ends up with Iran
having nuclear capability of sort, they
have the high regime and if nothing
would happen with the missiles, they
would continue to support the proxies.
Then the Israelis would have a
difficulty with that. But this is for
the future and for the negotiation with
Iran. I think besides that, the Israelis
would be happy to forgive. Would be
happy to put this away. The Israel likes
the US more than any other country in
the world by far.
And this friction, the Israelis would be
happy if this is over.
>> And Mark, on the US side?
>> I think in a short term, things can
survive in terms of the aid continuing.
Fences can be mended. Things can appear
on the surface to be basically normal.
However,
I do think that there is this
fundamental shift in American opinion
that has played out over time, but it's
been a particularly acute in the last
two and a half, three years. Since
October 7th,
>> [music]
>> the Gaza war, two Iran wars, the war in
Lebanon.
There's this view, [music] especially
among younger people, but not entirely
among younger people, who associate
Israel with Netanyahu.
And they don't see the benefits of
America's alliance with Israel. In fact,
they see more negative.
>> [music]
>> And that is a political shift that it's
hard to see reversing
given where American politics are going,
where not only the Democrats but the
Republican Party is going.
And so, [music] this I think is sort of
reflects what Ronan is talking about,
the fear in Israel.
Even if it hasn't sort of sunk in yet in
Israel,
>> [music]
>> that they're losing America.
And I think that's a very real
phenomenon. And that could, in the end,
be one of the real lasting legacies of
this war and of this moment.
>> [music]
>> Well, Mark, Ronan, thank you both so
much.
>> Thanks, Natalie.
>> Thanks so much.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
On Tuesday, the House overwhelmingly
passed a landmark [music] housing bill,
clearing the way for President Trump to
sign the most significant piece of
housing legislation in more than three
decades.
>> [music]
>> The measure aims to tackle the housing
crisis by boosting supply in an effort
to deal with [music] the acute shortage
of homes in America.
The Senate already passed its version of
the same bill, and a White House
official said that Trump was expected to
sign it into law on Wednesday. [music]
And the Senate adopted a resolution
[music] instructing President Trump to
end the war in Iran or seek
congressional authorization to keep
[music] it going.
Trump never sought approval from
Congress for the war, and this was the
most significant bipartisan rebuke of
the conflict yet.
The resolution doesn't have the force of
law, [music] but it did represent a
symbolically important break with the
president by some in the GOP.
The measure passed 50 to 48 with four
Republicans joining [music] Democrats in
favor.
Today's episode [music] was produced by
Ricky Novetsky, Caitlin O'Keefe, and
Jessica Chung. It was edited by Page
Cowett and Lisa Tobin and contains music
by Dan [music] Powell and Alicia E-tube.
Our theme music is by Wonderly. This
episode was engineered by Alyssa [music]
Moxley.
That's [music] it for the daily. I'm
Natalie Kitroeff.
See you tomorrow.
>> [music]